Your first stories and novels didn't appear when they're written.
They didn't appear when you were in your mid-30s or so.
What had you been doing up until that time?
Now, I had a couple of careers.
You know, mine was a draft degeneration.
We all got drafted at 18, you know, right into the Army.
And I spent the next four years in the AOT, the Army Occupation of Texas.
I sent all the Yankees down here to, you know, teach conglomerate school and aerial gunnery.
I went to art school after the war and then spent 10 years as a commercial artist, mostly in comics.
And then graduated into editing, editing comics, editing pulp magazines.
So I had been around professionally in publishing for a good 10 years, which was not a handicap.
I think it helped.
You were involved, from my understanding, in comics and art.
Did this help you later on with science fiction?
Well, it was a two-barrel question, you know.
I always read science fiction.
Now, the science fiction fan, at the time I was seven years old,
and I read this stuff, read before the Army, afterwards, and then I illustrated science fiction.
And through that, I knew all the authors as an artist.
I was Harry the Artist, and I illustrated books for them and magazine.
And I was around writers all the time.
Science fiction writers.
I really didn't care much about writing.
I cared about science fiction.
So when I started stepping sideways out of drawing into editing and writing,
I wrote everything.
I wrote men's adventures, westerns, historical articles.
I did a fine article on the history of Texas about the Battle of Goliath,
which no one remembers but me.
And then I started writing fiction, and I naturally wrote science fiction.
And I naturally sold it, I suppose, because I'd been writing a lot,
been around the arts for a long time.
And if anything, it helped my visual sense.
When you read my stuff, I hope the rear has a physical sense of where they are
and what's happening, and that's it.
Was your first sale to John Campbell?
No, no.
My first sale was to Damon Knight, who I knew as an editor.
He did a magazine called Worlds Beyond.
I was illustrating about half of it.
And the third issue, I illustrated almost all of it,
but I got down the flu and I couldn't draw, but I could type.
I wrote a short story and asked him what I should do with it.
He paid me $100 for it.
It's a good beginning, you know, I thought.
And my agent at the time, Fred Pohl, put an anthology.
Wow, that's the way to start your career.
And it took me years to sell anything after that.
I didn't write much fiction, but very early on,
I think maybe a second or third or fourth sale,
I sent the Stainless Steel Rat story to John Campbell.
He bought it as a novelette.
And after that, my relationship with him was very close.
I see him all the time, work with him, and since collaborate with him.
And all my first five or six novels were done as serials for analog.
And when I say collaborate, I would send John an outline of an idea,
a page or two of a book I'd like to do.
I was thinking about doing, he sent back 18 page letter of what I could do with the book.
He would never tell you to do something.
He just suggested, do you ever think of doing that or that?
And with his help, I developed a lot of tools.
And I was a typical Campbell writer.
I read the magazine, so I was born, I suppose.
And I didn't bend to John's will.
I just wanted to be there as a Campbell writer.
And I really was a typical one for, I said, the first half dozen books
until I had an idea for a book I knew John would not buy,
a book called Bill the Galactic Hero, which I never submitted to him.
And my feelings were right, I'll tell you, years later.
I was in his office and he said, why did you write that book?
What book, John? What Bill the Galactic Hero?
I said, how do you know I wrote it?
He said, I saw it in the subway newsstand and I bought it.
The whole thought of him buying, he didn't get enough of them,
slush pie, he had to go out and buy books.
And I gave him some waffling answer about why I wrote it.
Because it was a direct opposite of everything he believed in and wanted to do.
It was experimental prose, it was anti-military,
he put the boot to fascist, all the good things, you know.
You drew him very well and wrote for him and understood his system.
What is your comment to people that say,
some people think he had a very healthy effect on science fiction,
some people think he would have been better off without it?
John W. Campbell invented modern science fiction.
When he came along, it was just pulp garbage.
He took it and shaped it.
What we see today, John Campbell did.
His personal attitude towards number of things,
engineering wise, politics wise, I disagree with him at the time
and told him so.
But his overall effect in the field, he did what you see today,
John Campbell did.
Perhaps it had been done eventually.
But single handedly, he stepped down from the mount with the tablets
and took this dismal fantasy field
and developed his modern intellectual, intelligent,
scientifically based science fiction.
It's gone a lot different ways since.
I mean now half of science fiction is pure fantasy.
The solid core that he made people do is very, very dim.
But without that core, you wouldn't have modern science fiction.
Your first novel that was published,
first science fiction novel that was published,
I should put it was Death World.
And that's adventure fiction, which is probably what you're noted for.
And Jason Denault was your main character.
How did that evolve?
Did Jason hit you and then the plot?
Or did he just come up with what you were thinking?
Death World does a number of things.
You mentioned the fact that it was adventure science fiction.
Well, don't laugh, but at that time in science fiction,
which was Campbell, which was analog.
If you were a true blue reader,
you read Starling Stories in Trillion Wonder,
because you'd had to wait another three weeks for the next issue of...
Astounding, that's where the action was.
And he had been very cerebral.
He had a whole novel of people talking to each other.
Nothing moving at all, no action.
And I want to do a book that had action part of the plot.
I mean, that's sort of stupid to say now with all the guns blowing heads away.
I mean, that whole gore school and the whole sword and sorcery, sword and butchery.
I mean, action galore, for no reason at all.
But in those days, it was getting dim, I thought.
So I worked out, but I didn't want to do an action plot for action, say.
So I'm a great back plotter, and it says I find a reason to do a book
and then fit a book to the reason.
And the reason I want to have the action, I want to have a realistic.
So I thought it was Superman.
And in this book, you find, if you look at it closely, it's done two or three levels.
The action plots a service.
But there below that is the idea of Superman and Nietzsche talked about.
And that Superman magazine talks about.
And I'm very much against Superman, physical Superman.
And if you look in the book, you'll see that if you are so brutalized to be physically a Superman,
your intellectual content is zero.
And I said that in a number of different ways.
And I'm very much against militarism, and that's been there in a number of different ways.
All of it couched in an adventure plot.
And it's up to the reader to read whichever way he wants.
And he'll find a good adventure plot if he wants to find even more about it.
I remember when I first published it, a reader in England came up to me,
and I was looking forward to great return from literate Englishmen about heavily intellectual content.
And he said, oh, I read that book.
I saw my friends to read.
Oh, I like it.
You did.
But you tell me, oh, I said it's all about guns.
Jason used his knowledge, his experience, and his determination.
And always it started out in the novels.
He would turn the tables by using this sort of thing.
Is this kind of character traits that you admire?
Not really.
The Death World 2 and 3 came out by happenstance.
It's just that the character was successful.
I want to write another adventure-style book.
And I realized after I wrote it, I left the ending open.
You had to get these people off that planet.
The certain part of them had to leave.
They just go for killing things.
You start thinking about it.
And they're friends with his.
And he's a weak man personally.
And he has, like I say, he supplies a part.
So they don't supply.
They have the big bodies and the tiny poignant heads.
He's a weakling in their terms, but he's a man of intelligence.
So therefore, I said, gee, but if it was another planet,
you had a problem, you'd have to go along and organize it.
And then the plot developed.
I did that once more.
And that was the end of it, as far as I was concerned.
People asked for another Death World.
And no, I run that particular plot device.
Well, I would pin into it.
It worked three times.
It worked pretty well.
And I said, and OK, Death World 2, you may think it's about going off
and blowing things up and killing things and rushing around.
It really is.
The entire book is about the difference in meaning between ethics and ethos.
And that's what it's about.
I keep repeating over and over through that thing.
And a lot of guns go off.
A lot of good things happen.
You learn a bit of Esperanto.
But also what science fiction can do, it's a book that takes the study
of a philosophical question or a problem of meaning and meaning.
Would you ever do another one first?
None get tired of it.
I did a short story for the Ken Memorial volume, which I edited.
And then I did an even shorter story a year or two ago for a games magazine.
They wanted to do a Death World game.
And they had an idea of a rough plot.
And I did a short story to go in the magazine.
The game was designed around the story.
But I feel no desire to.
I mean, I don't have to.
Luckily, at this stage in life, I can write the books I want to write.
And I see nothing there.
I mean, what you see is what you get.
It's complete in the trilogy.
Fine.
End of step sideways and salute and step out.
So it kind of summarized it.
Yes, it was a trilogy.
But when you wrote Death World itself, you didn't necessarily have that in mind.
No, I wrote a book.
After I finished it, I realized I let an ambiguous ending to it in one sense.
A lot of your characters couldn't go on living unless they left that planet.
That thought in mind.
Another planet.
Having finished that, I can see one more story with the same group of characters.
Did that.
And that was the end.
OK, the other than the other famous hero from that time was the stainless steel rat, which
is now a pentology.
I can say that.
Yes.
And then this is this is adventure science fiction, but it's it's satirical.
It's a parody.
So I guess at the same time you're writing adventure science fiction, you were writing
parody adventure science fiction.
Yeah, right.
Well, the humor came.
I remember the basic idea.
It was just that as the old rat says that we have, you know, flesh and blood rats and
wooden buildings will have stainless steel rats and concrete ones.
It is basically a very old idea of the villain as hero.
Turn the world eye's head.
This is what you have in the saint who tends to pontificate a little bit too much.
It's where you have a Rupert of Hensau and that prisoner of Zenda.
You all love him better.
We've done the goodie goodies for the job.
It is if you're pardoned expression.
My dear friend, King's the Ami said a pick a rest novel.
And don't be ashamed.
You understand that means I said, thanks, King's the Ami.
And ran off to a dictionary.
The pick a rest novel is just that villain as the hero is villain villain as hero.
And when I realized that I was doing that I'd come onto a formula and I was trying to get humor into it as well.
There was no humor in science fiction.
There's nothing that I was doing.
Anyone else alive.
The character developed as he went along and I get clues back from Rear's about it.
And then English reader told me he likes to read this thing because the hero does all the thing he wish he could do against society and gets away with it.
You know, everyone hates bureaucracy.
And I said, my God, you're right.
I thought about in the very next rat book, the first chapter, nothing to do with the rest of the book.
If you look at it, it's just something happens to his dear wife, Angelina, and the enemy has her.
And he goes off.
The enemy is the internal review service, the old IRS man, you know, he goes and burns on all income tax records for the whole planet.
Sharing everybody up, you know, and the story begins.
But that's something we all wish could happen tomorrow except that people work for the IRS.
And the seven of them got busted for selling dope in California.
But it grew, it grew, let's say.
What place does humor have in science fiction?
Very little.
It could have a bigger one.
And the answer is a very mechanical one.
Editors, for the most part, are dummies.
And even the few bright ones have their own particular taste in humor.
That is a matter of taste.
You bring an adventure novel in and it will say, yeah, well, Harry's unbetter, but it's moved along.
People are killed.
I'll buy it.
Bring a love story and oh, well, you know, girl gets kissed, you know, it's a little boring, but I'll buy it.
You're bringing a humor novel.
Doesn't laugh.
He does not buy it.
And if they laugh, I've heard them say, I wanted them to reject it was too funny.
They're afraid the readers won't laugh.
So the only way you can sell humor is have a reputation as a humor writer.
And how do you get a humor writer?
You've got to sell a book, but you can't sell it.
It's a catch-tweeting two thing.
And I snuck it in the stay-in-steel rat.
I would make each one funny than the one before.
And eventually the editor was laughing, Rears were laughing.
Hurrah, I'm a humor writer.
Slipper, Jim DeGrees.
DeGrees?
You got it right first time.
Okay.
Was another memorable character.
So I'll ask kind of the same question again.
Did you think of him first or the idea of the stainless steel rat and then build a character around that?
How do the mechanics of how characters surface and are fleshed out?
How do the character...
Wait, hold the answer for a second.
For a fact, dear?
Okay, I'll wait until the door slams.
I might include it again.
All right.
In science fiction, science fiction is not a character-based form of fiction.
You can have three-dimensional characters in science fiction.
But the idea comes first.
It's an idea fiction.
To form a fiction, we can have the idea as a hero.
The main thing that has that is what you call three-dimensional.
Have the idea for a character who would do these things.
Which means far too often in science fiction, you'll get two-dimensional characters who just act the assigned role of the plot given to the by the author.
And we don't mind reading that.
We really want to read about the action to make good science fiction, viable, interesting, fun science fiction,
when you have to assign the character the role, you must build his character as a character.
That's where the art comes in.
There are two things in all kinds of fictions.
The craft of science fiction, constructing your plot.
The art of science fiction is making your characters three-dimensional.
Which is true for any character I write.
I very rarely in science fiction do you have character-based fiction.
If you have it, you should not science fiction.
Okay, that brings us to Bill.
Bill, go ahead.
He was a dummy.
He grew up in a high.
It's an unmitigated spoof.
Yeah, well, Bill would like to hear.
There again, he was assigned the role.
He was a good soldier, Shfaq.
He's the guy who gets it in the neck all the time.
And it had to be a science fiction army.
And I think it just makes it explode in me.
Having been in the army and seated here in the heart of the military,
I'm an enlisted man.
I have the highest rank in the army, that of a sergeant.
You have to get to general before you get anything higher than that.
Second lieutenant, you know, like grubs to be walked on.
And the whole different attitude.
And the officers like the military.
They like to tell people what to do.
And usually, what they tell them to do is not for the good of the people they're talking to.
They should get killed for it.
We're right.
But the enlisted men want to stay alive.
As the Osirians said in catch 22, they're trying to kill me.
He didn't mean the enemy.
He meant the army he was in.
And knowing all this, reading all this, catch 22 came out.
I was a great fan of Kandy.
And when I saw catch 22, what he did, the Heller did,
he showed that there's some things so awful that you have to laugh at them to understand them.
If you do a military novel, you say, blood, blood, death, and testines in the trees.
By the 20th time you hang the testines from the trees, you're tired looking at them.
It looks like spaghetti after a while.
Repetition of horror doesn't make horror.
And that's all you can do.
The army is utterly horrible, boring and wasteful.
The military life is boring and wasteful.
And in there, I parodied a few other novels just for fun of it.
But the thing that goes right through it is understanding the military.
Usually I discovered that I had a Korean war veteran come up to me,
he's a combat marine, wouldn't have his face all shut away.
And he said, you're a Korean horse.
I said, yes, yes.
He said, you wrote Bill the Glanting Hero?
I said, yes, looking for a chair to hide behind.
He said, I've got a copy of every edition of that book.
I carry it through to combat, you know.
And that tells a story.
Another guy was the same thing, John Paul.
He was a real Green Beret, the kind that had a bangle.
He worked with the Montagnards, not like John Wayne with the fake one.
He was up there and he killed him, a great killing.
And Napoleon's troops carried a marshals baton in their pack.
He carried a copy of Bill the Glanting Hero, all through the Korean War up there.
Killing gooks and everything.
And he used to get his rookies in.
He read him a chapter every night whether they liked it or not.
He'd break them in half, you know.
And then, so, I really feel that it's humor and parody and a lot of fun.
But it tells you something about the military condition that is absolutely dead true.
It's funny, my next question is, Bill the Glanting Hero is a slap at making war in the military.
Is this what you feel?
Yeah, I said, you also got in some links at the bureaucracy.
Yeah, so all that was answered.
And that, isn't it?
Yeah, and you spoofed the pulp, the old science fiction pulp traditions.
There was a lot of trant or...
Yeah, a lot of... that's right.
The pro-military novel is like Starship Trooper, you know, where everyone's been kind to each other.
In fact, I saw Norman Spinner put it in the article the other week.
As Harry Harrison said, Bill Glanting is always Bob your buddy week.
And this was, we said in the army, in a novel whose name I shall not mention,
the guy in the heavy space armor is going down.
All friends come to rescue him, you know.
And in Bill, the guy goes in the swamp, the soldiers are marching by.
He says, help me, help me.
And they walk on by.
He says, Bob your buddy week.
And they say it's always Bob your buddy week.
And that's what he's saying in the army, you know.
I mean, it always is.
It's every man for himself.
Normally, normally.
You expect to get it put in broken off and usually does.
There's some references in there.
I wonder in several generations from now how they'll stand up.
I know the ship he was on was the Christine Wheeler.
And who's going to know what that means, you know?
Yeah, well, I should revise versions of that every 10 years, you know.
But there was the good ship Trotsky.
That'll stand.
I mean, I also, the British edition, the Golden Thread, the use of Christine Heeler,
had to change it to Fanny Hill.
So much for, so did the publishers.
Okay.
Make room, make room, which is probably your serious novel,
the one that you're known for, that sort of thing.
And the topic was overpopulation.
And you obviously, when I read it, you obviously felt very strong about population
and yet you didn't preach.
How did you walk that thing line?
And you must feel.
Okay.
Science fiction tends to preach and tell you things, you know.
It goes back to the old pups when you wanted to say,
you should tell them what you're going to tell them, tell them and tell them you told them.
And all the early science fiction, they go into time machine
and there'll be the young assistant or a young girl, young guy, and he said,
tell me professor, how does it work?
Two and a half pages later, you learn how it works, you know.
Which I put the boot in the technical time machine.
I have the same thing happen.
And the guy says, gee, professor, how does the time machine work?
And the professor says, you're too stupid to understand.
And I thought, a good explanation, you know.
Science fiction has a auditory finger, tells you what to do and how to do it.
And I felt very serious about population.
At that time, I wrote the book, there were no fictional works on population.
There were no, these popular nonfiction books hadn't come out.
The world was completely unaware where we were going.
And I could see it.
I lived in Mexico and watched what was happening.
You read the Learned Journalist, he told you about it.
So I wanted to do a propaganda work that was disguised as not being propaganda.
And so I said it in the year 1999 in New York.
It makes a millennial novel, brings a lot of overtones, you know, the millennium,
coming of Christ and the sort of thing.
And I didn't want to lecture.
So I very simply started a book, put the characters in the world,
went along for almost a fifth of the book,
and got everyone involved before someone turned to one character, the older character.
How did the world get this way?
At this point, I felt the reader was trapped enough to take one page of the lecture.
And I sent the book in my hand and said,
Harry, they're trapped up, take four pages of the lecture.
So I just put in four pages, copy about a thousand words, two pages in the book,
telling you how the world got that way.
So my one little lecture right there, having done that little lecture,
so it was in a sense a work of propaganda and art.
If you have better art, better propaganda.
1984 is propaganda.
On the beach is propaganda.
Both art, you get the message.
And that was it.
And after that, I worked around the point.
And if you were alive and warm, you understood it.
And the readers did.
Okay.
Yeah, I have to come in here.
The shortages of materials, water, food, electricity were all made very real by the text.
You weren't lecturing.
It was just obvious and the reader could picture it.
And I thought maybe that might harken back to your artist days about how you visualize things.
As I think, having worked as an artist for a number of years,
I see in my mind when I'm writing, I have a stage of people walking around.
And I see what's in the background, the foreground.
I hear the waves splashing and see them splashing.
And as always in writing, you should never tell you should show.
And good writing is hard work.
It should be transparent.
The reader should not see how you got the effect.
And one of the best ways, of course, it's hard to do is never say the world is full of a lot of people.
Never say you're short of water.
Show them online to get water out of a standpipe.
And then you know you're short of water and dramatize a need for the water.
And this is where your art comes in.
Which, for a lot of people, if the writer cannot do that, then he's not,
that doesn't succeed on that level.
If you read his book for fun, you know,
if you get the reader emotionally involved, get him trapped into the book.
And he comes out again, maybe not agreeing with you,
but at least he knows what you're said.
He'll be thinking about it.
And I had one girl read that book in New York.
She said, if I thought the world would be like that, I commit suicide.
I said, don't, don't.
The actor thinking that means you're going to vote right and work for this world will not appeal.
That's a science fiction admonishing finger again saying, shape up or ship out.
If you don't do this, you'll get that.
I also view this as a detective novel.
Is that fair?
It's fair.
All science fiction, for the most part, is based on detective plot.
It's a mystery.
Will it be solved?
Even if they're not called like Hell, Clemens, Needle, not officially a mystery,
you want to find out how you got that way.
Will they solve the problem?
Will they all live?
Will they get all this world?
Will they do it?
Now that was the deliberate bit of my plot, a plot device of mine
that I wanted to show society from the lowest levels to the high.
I wanted to show how everybody lived in that world.
So I use a very simple device of having a detective as protagonist.
And a very simple story.
And we all know from the beginning who did the murder.
I mean, we knew what's going to happen.
And it was not important, but it was a device to move the story along.
And like most crimes in New York, 9% aren't solved.
It's just by chance that they are.
This is a way of getting you into the various levels of the strategy of society.
I got to ask you then, they made a movie out of it.
Call it Soil and Green, threw in some, made it cannibalism.
Did you have anything to do with the screenplay or any input,
or was that just, you just had to watch your baby get changed?
First time I heard about the fact that they wanted to make a film out of this book
was when I approached for a contract and I signed it.
And then it turned out the firm that bought it was a front for MGM.
And they sold MGM for $1.
They hate to pay the writer a decent fee.
For some reason, they pay everyone else.
They don't like to pay writers in Hollywood.
And it turned out that the producer Walter Zelzer and lead actor Chuck Heston
have been trying to sell MGM for five years.
And they couldn't sell MGM thought that overpopulation wasn't important enough to a film on.
So they then got a moronic screenwriter who put in the cannibalism.
He thought they'd eat that up in MGM.
And they did. They thought it'd be a great idea for a film.
So it was bought as a cannibalism film.
And I saw the screenplay and it was pretty atrocious.
And I could not do anything.
By contract I couldn't change one word.
So what I did do, I kept saying in memos what was wrong physically, how it could not work.
And they made a lot of changes.
I went down the set and pointed out things that hadn't been done.
And I gave copies of the book to all the actors and all the technical people
and they got very interested.
And I talked to Eddie Robinson.
I remember he talked to Dick Fleischer.
I heard him say, I don't understand who I'm supposed to be. What is this role?
And there's no way to like in that rotten screenplay what it was.
So I asked if I could talk to him. I deduced myself.
And we had lunch.
I said, I wrote the book. Oh, it's very interesting.
The Literate Man, Art Collector, you know.
I explained that in the book in the year 2000, that is me.
My army record, my age.
The hero there, nothing.
The old man is the only person who knew the good world as he was playing.
He said, the only person who lived when the world was green.
He said, that's a good idea. That's not bad.
Having got that much, he went away and acted.
A lot of that was created on camera.
The interface between the director and the actors.
And I like to think myself. That was there all the time.
And I like to feel, A, it was my book.
And B, if there was some worth in the film, I helped to add to it.
So you were the, I can't remember his name.
The character.
Oh, I forget myself.
Yeah, the old man, Saul.
Yeah.
So you were him.
That's what, in a sense it was.
I guess to keep him as a three-dimensional character, I just used myself when I was at that age.
I don't want to live in that world.
That's why I wrote the book.
I do not want to be that person at that time.
And there again, the technical people were so tremendous and the acting was so good.
And it does what science fiction does so well.
Background as foreground.
You go to see it's a stupid little detective plot.
And you know it's going to be bodies made in the sun and green.
And then about a week later, you start thinking about that horrible world, that green world you're living in.
My God.
And then succeeding that plane.
It was sort of a shocker and emotional shocker.
It worked.
I think it works pretty well as a film.
There have been no complaints.
It's the only film MGM made money on that year.
It tells you you have the Great Walls bomb that cost 14 million and grossed 500,000.
So MGM should be happy and Reston should be happy.
I can't complain.
Okay.
The last two books we've talked about in Make Room, Make Room and Dill with the Hero.
Bill with the War Mongering, Human Race and Make Room, Make Room with the Overpopulation.
It's kind of a grim pessimistic future and it says something about human nature.
Is that human nature?
I'm sure you think that's what it would be careful or that's us.
Yeah.
Well, human nature is human nature.
You can't guess what it is.
It's there for you to see.
And I like to talk about and think about it.
I like to see where it might be going.
I like to think about it.
And sometimes it's very grim.
Sometimes it's very funny.
I write the funny books.
I cheer myself up between Ryan and the grim books.
And I thought that many grim books when you get down to it.
Make Room, Make Room is about population and how we're destroying our planet through stupidly
with the presidents involved in destroying the planet.
You know, destroying our heritage, spaceship earth, or logical arguments which are being
ignored by those in control.
And then I'm anti-war.
And that's about it as far as the deep thought books go.
They're two big, deep things.
You'll find these things reoccurring in other books.
But they're two very, I think, very obvious and simple things.
It can't be said too often.
I'm like, Gans warm for keeping what we've got.
That's not too bad.
They just elected a party in Germany, the Green Party, on the basis of just that much.
They got 5% of the votes?
They had enough of the vote, around 5% to get 25 people in the Bundage done.
Okay.
To kind of just get to hit on some of the other fiction, Planet of No Return was fairly recently.
It was a sequel to Planet of the Damned.
Is that something you thought about doing?
No, no.
The exorcism of publishing produced strange offspring.
I wrote Planet of the Damned years ago.
In a way, it's death row one more time.
There's slight differences.
In fact, I wrote death row five or six times.
One guy's another until I decided to break out and do Billy Glad to your hero.
I did that.
It was completely into itself.
Then a few years ago, publisher were doing these illustrated books, which really are just juveniles.
This is what they are.
They're a really short novel with pictures in them for kids.
Unlike Most Science for Can Rise, I ran out of money at the time.
He said, how are you doing illustrating a book for me?
I said, no.
He said, we'll give you the X number of thousand dollars.
I said, yes.
I shopped around my older books and I saw I could do a sequel.
We have Fast Pace Adventure Book with a little content as well.
There's a little bit about women's rights in there.
If you look closely at the end, they're all male fascists.
Why are these guys?
I'd love to kill each other.
A little bit of plot, mystery plot.
It's an option for a film.
We make a nice, fast film.
It was not a bad book.
It's a juvenile, done for a certain market.
Not ashamed of it or proud of it.
It's just a book I did and there it is.
I've kind of grouped you into a tent and color time machine, Star Smash, The Galaxy
or Rangers, Tunnel Through the Deep.
Those are humorous books.
You apparently interspersed them with your serious books for the reasons you don't.
I don't really set out to alternate books.
It's just many times you have to thrust upon you.
In a technical time machine, I can plot a very, very serious book.
Time travel.
And when I got this paparazzo tang camera and back facing this great, big, nine foot tall
flying, I started to laugh.
And it came out funny.
But if you look there, it's a very solid time travel plot, which could be a serious book.
Except I suddenly realized I started laughing and I'm laughing.
Why shouldn't the readers laugh and the way the thing went.
It took off that way.
And I think it had that serious structure beneath it.
Star Smash or The Galaxy or Rangers.
I was feeling a deadly mood one day and I was so tired of rubbish.
So tired.
You know, Daryl Doc Smith wrote his Space Hoppers back in the 30s and 40s.
That's a long time ago.
And the period form of art, I think, is dead.
But I keep seeing certain writers who shall be nameless rehashing old Space Hoppers.
I said, oh, I've had enough of this.
So I said, why not just put the boot to all the Space Hoppers one time, have fun doing
it.
And I made internal parodies of everyone I could think of.
People accused me of hating Doc Smith.
No, I don't like, I love Docs.
Like, Roop-Ring Doc Smith.
But I just don't, I think the feel is dead.
I'd like to put a tombstone over it.
Not that you ever can in fiction.
There's still going on doing it anyway.
But I enjoy myself.
The reeds enjoy it.
Some, I mean, the two kind of reeds.
Some say you're hating Doc Smith.
You know, they chase me around.
And they say, huh, I feel a whole bunch of them.
You know, so there it is.
It takes your choice.
Okay.
I, the series I read before we came here was the To the Stars series.
I don't know if that's your name for it or not.
Yeah, that's my name.
Yeah.
I thought, well, I personally thought the covers on the American editions were terrible.
I didn't show a damn thing.
The guy with the guns.
Yes.
I kind of liked it because it gave you the first book.
Here's this guy and this, he's this Urbane sophisticated man and a man about the world, the rich.
And then it's, then the next novel is an adventure novel.
And then it kind of is a hybrid third one.
And I kind of enjoyed that because you kind of got to show all your facets.
Even some humor.
A bit, a bit.
A Star Wars thing.
We were talking about this morning.
A touch, a touch here and there.
Yeah.
That, that book, it comes about, came about, that the trilogy came about through the inability
I have to just to take the situation as set.
I can, I know what I got the idea from when I was in California on the freeway with my
friend Brian, all this.
We were in a horrible little English Sprite, which is about eight inches high and two feet
wide.
And it goes a maximum of 50 miles an hour.
And we're trumbling along five lane freeway, California five, great big articulated trucks
with trails going by 14 foot high wheels.
I'm looking at the bottom of hubcaps, you know, trying to keep the thing going straight.
I had a vision of that point of a world where trucks ran forever on and on and on, through
around the whole plan.
How can we do that?
So I had to develop a whole plan and a culture to get them there.
And by the time I'd done it and written the book, the editor said, I feel it's incomplete.
How did they get there in the first place?
And what happened that revolution afterwards?
I said, you're right.
I got so much plotting in here.
I have a whole book before and a book afterwards.
So I took the character.
He ride this plan for nameless reasons and it ended with the revolution, which is going
wrong.
So I went back and told you how he got there.
Took an earth and I closed the book together in the final one.
They came out different.
The one middle one was written first.
They had to be a different aspect, you know, then the third one, of course, put the first
two together.
But as you said, I use different things at different times in their high technology and
the enjoyment of technology and a little bit of politics.
And the first one is some ways like a make room, make room.
And so where are we going to go if we don't get a hold of technology and what we can do?
If you know, I say the very, the first book is, shows you how rotten Britain will be 500
years from now.
The third book, how rotten America will be 500 years from now and all done for good intentions
with lack of knowledge of how to go about taking care of helping people.
And they're both rotten worlds.
So there again, the administrative thing is being shaken.
No, this is you.
You must get technologies involved.
You must do somehow, not guess, you must just somehow do a better job of ruling the world,
you know, we're in a technological world and nobody in the British Parliament or the American
Senate or legislation knows anything about science.
I mean, we are a bunch of ex lawyers and politicians.
Politicians have one motivation life.
That's to get reelected.
Look at the whole Nixon trouble came about because all he wanted to do would be reelected
and doesn't care what you do.
And that's the wrong thing.
I'm not saying I can't see any easy answers to them.
Just saying that there are answers.
We are now a technology revolution.
We now are going into the computer world and no one has consistently thought what will
happen to most people.
And in a way behind all the adventure stories, there is a consideration of those problems.
The character, I almost thought was the strongest character in those, in that trilogy of the
first last book was the brother-in-law again.
His name escapes me.
That's why I had a written name.
Yes.
The brother-in-law character.
Did you have somebody in mind?
Not really.
A question you ask is the brother-in-law whose name I forget, the hyphen they are named George
Barlington Stone or something.
If you look closely, let me say I'm not pretending to be subtle.
I'm saying that I am subtle.
I'm saying if you examine these books, you'll find a couple of levels.
The first book plot-wise and character-wise is a tip of the hat, another head to George
Orwell's 1984.
I even used the word, leader and for pint and they were his thing.
They were drinking leaders instead of pints.
I used the word, pros.
I put the clues in there for you to find.
And the brother-in-law character is the same torturer character from Brian O'Brien or Brian
was the other fellow.
It is the man who knows his evil and is in charge of an evil society.
And that's why he's in the first book.
But having not killed him off in the first, he has to appear again and then you get what
I thought was the only truthful ending, the ambiguous ending to the third one.
People hate me for what happened.
I said, that's what life is.
Science fiction gives you easy answers, but in real life there are no easy answers.
That's what I really liked about it.
It was not clear-cut.
That is life.
Okay, I want to talk to you a little bit then.
You've also done a lot of editing.
You slandered editors while ago.
I slandered editors?
That's right.
Because having edited a number of pulp magazines and having edited 85 anthologies, I can knock
editors.
That's not an easy job, is it?
It's not a hard job.
It's easier than writing.
A successful editor who actually doesn't just copy edit, an editor who purchases stories
and prints them in the magazine or a book editor, has to have taste that matches the public.
The skills attach are very minor.
You can learn to copy edit and to correct.
Not to correct.
Two things good editors have.
That is, their taste matches the public enough.
What they buy, people will read.
They're publishing how it succeeds.
Secondly, better editors have editorial taste where they can take and tell a writer how
he can improve his book or his short story.
That's something that's like a skill like writing.
They're not the same skill.
Most editors can't write.
Most writers can't edit.
Just by chance, I haven't fallen into this.
I enjoy a certain amount of editing.
I think it helps my own writing.
There again.
I like to refer back to my own work.
When I've done a draft of a book, I try very, very hard to step out of the role of author
and look at that as an editor who isn't working.
This is not common to me.
I mean, how many ways, years ago, every good writer has an inborn automatic shit detector.
You smell your manuscript.
It smells bad.
You throw it out.
There again.
It goes into making an author with a lot of different skills.
If they all work, they work.
They don't forget it.
Apparently, the editor that edited Will Whirls said,
hey, you needed beginning and an ending.
They did you a service.
So editors can.
Can.
Well, the girl said this.
She said, I feel it's not complete.
There's more to it.
I can't expand it.
There's no way.
The second book, Will Whirls Complete Into Itself, begins where it has to begin and ends where it has to end.
And started me thinking, yeah.
So in a sense, good editor point out that.
And but normally I would just said, no, it is a success.
Succeeds where it is.
But then again, I was in financial problems.
So by God, I got trilogy here rather than one book.
And two years later, I had three books instead of one, which helps.
They package them nicely.
They go three into one and works very well.
Okay, we've talked before you ask the question.
Let me see my wife.
Yeah.